.TH "JGMENU(1)
.PD 0
.P
.PD
% Johan Malm
.PD 0
.P
.PD
% 11 September, 2017
.SH NAME
.PP
jgmenu \- A simple X11 menu
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
jgmenu\ [\-\-no\-spawn]\ [\-\-checkout=<\f[I]tag\f[]>]\ [\-\-config\-file=<\f[I]file\f[]>]
.PD 0
.P
.PD
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ [\-\-icon\-size=<\f[I]size\f[]>] [\-\-at\-pointer]
[\-\-hide\-on\-startup]
.PD 0
.P
.PD
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ [\-\-simple] [\-\-vsimple] [\-\-csv\-file<\f[I]file\f[]>]
.PD 0
.P
.PD
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ [\-\-csv\-cmd=<\f[I]command\f[]>]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
jgmenu is a small menu application for Linux/BSD.
It is intended to
.PD 0
.P
.PD
be used with openbox and tint2, but is not dependent on these.
It has
.PD 0
.P
.PD
a number of helper\-scripts and wrappers.
See \f[I]JGMENU_RUN\f[](1) for
.PD 0
.P
.PD
further details.
.PP
jgmenu reads a list of new\-line (\[aq]\\n\[aq]) separated items from
standard
.PD 0
.P
.PD
input (stdin) and creates a menu.
Each line is parsed into
.PD 0
.P
.PD
\f[I]description\f[], \f[I]command\f[] and \f[I]icon\f[], using comma as
a field separator.
.PD 0
.P
.PD
Empty lines and lines beginning with \[aq]#\[aq] are ignored.
When the user
.PD 0
.P
.PD
selects an item (by left\-clicking or pressing enter), the
\f[C]command\f[] of
.PD 0
.P
.PD
their selection is executed as a new process.
.PP
For example:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
printf\ "Terminal,xterm\\nWeb\ Browser,firefox"\ |\ jgmenu\ \-\-simple\ \ 
\f[]
.fi
.PP
If the user wishes to use a comma in a field, triple quotes can be
.PD 0
.P
.PD
used around the whole field in the format aaa,"""bbb"""
.PP
For example:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
foo,"""^pipe(find\ /usr/share/pixmaps\ \-printf\ \[aq]%f,display\ %p,%p\\n\[aq])"""
\f[]
.fi
.PP
The following mark\-up is supported in the \f[I]description\f[] field:
.IP \[bu] 2
^sep() \- define a separator (with or without text)
.PP
The following mark\-up is supported in the \f[I]command\f[] field:
.IP \[bu] 2
^tag() \- define a submenu
.IP \[bu] 2
^checkout() \- check\-out a submenu
.IP \[bu] 2
^sub() \- draw a "submenu" arrow
.IP \[bu] 2
^back() \- check\-out parent menu
.IP \[bu] 2
^term() \- run program in terminal
.IP \[bu] 2
^pipe() \- execute sub\-process and checkout a menu based on its
.PD 0
.P
.PD
\ \ stdout.
.PP
Icons will be displayed if the third field is populated; for example:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
Terminal,xterm,utilities\-terminal
Firefox,firefox,firefox
\f[]
.fi
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-no\-spawn
redirect command to stdout rather than executing it
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-checkout=<\f[I]tag\f[]>
checkout submenu <\f[I]tag\f[]> on startup
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-config\-file=<\f[I]file\f[]>
read config file
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-icon\-size=<\f[I]size\f[]>
specify icon size (22 by default)
.PD 0
.P
.PD
.RS
.RE
.PP
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ If set to 0, icons will not be loaded.
.TP
.B \-\-at\-pointer
launch menu at mouse pointer
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-hide\-on\-startup
start menu is hidden state
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-simple
ignore tint2 settings and run in \[aq]short\-lived\[aq] mode (i.e.
exit
.PD 0
.P
.PD
.RS
.RE
.PP
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ after mouse click or enter/escape)
.TP
.B \-\-vsimple
same as \-\-simple, but also disables icons and ignores jgmenurc
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-csv\-file=<\f[I]file\f[]>
specify menu file (in jgmenu flavoured CSV format)
.PD 0
.P
.PD
.RS
.RE
.PP
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ If file cannot be opened, input if reverted to
\f[I]stdin\f[]
.TP
.B \-\-csv\-cmd=<\f[I]command\f[]>
specify command to produce menu data
.PD 0
.P
.PD
.RS
.RE
.PP
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ E.g.
\f[C]jgmenu_run\ parse\-pmenu\f[]
.SH USER INTERFACE
.PP
The user interface is generally pretty intuitive.
Here follow mouse
.PD 0
.P
.PD
and keyboard events which are not so obvious:
.IP \[bu] 2
Right\-click \- return to parent menu
.PD 0
.P
.PD
.IP \[bu] 2
Backspace \- return to parent menu
.PD 0
.P
.PD
.IP \[bu] 2
F10 \- quit even if in \f[C]stay_alive\f[] mode
.SH CONFIGURATION SETTINGS
.PP
If no file is specified using the \-\-config\-file= option, the XDG Base
.PD 0
.P
.PD
Directory Specification is adhered to.
I.e:
.IP \[bu] 2
Global config in \f[C]${XDG_CONFIG_DIRS:\-/etc/xdg}\f[]
.PD 0
.P
.PD
.IP \[bu] 2
User config override in \f[C]${XDG_CONFIG_HOME:\-$HOME/.config}\f[]
.PP
For most users ~/.config/jgmenu/jgmenurc is appropriate.
.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
\f[C]JGMENU_RUN(1)\f[]
.PD 0
.P
.PD
\f[C]JGMENUTUTORIAL(7)\f[]
.PD 0
.P
.PD
\f[C]JGMENU\-CONFIG(1)\f[]
.PP
The jgmenu source code and documentation can be downloaded from
.PD 0
.P
.PD
<https://github.com/johanmalm/jgmenu/>
